.TH rca 1 VERSIONSTRING
.SH NAME
rca \- a rich/RPN (and more) programmer's calculator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BR rca
.I [ initial rca command text ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rca
is a command-line reverse polish notation (RPN) calculator loosely
inspired by the long line of Hewlett-Packard scientific calculators.
Operators include scientific, logical, and bitwise operations.
.B rca
can also evaluate traditional infix expressions,
greatly expanding its usefulness.  As a programmer's calculator, word
width can be adjusted to emulate the arithmetic of any class of CPU.
.B rca
can also be easily incorporated into shell scripts to provide floating point
support.

Arithmetic is done using an arbitrary precision decimal floating point
library.  The default precision is 30 digits, which can be modified at
startup via the environment.

A complete list of operators and commands can be obtained with the
.B help
command.  Whitespace in
.BR rca 's
input is often optional, though some cases will cause ambiguity.
A
.B #
character starts a comment.  The rest of the line is ignored.

Depending on how
.B rca
is built, command-line editing, command history, and command
completion may be available, using either the editline or readline library.

.SH REVERSE POLISH NOTATION
Numbers entered by the user are pushed onto a stack.  An operator pops
those stack entries, usually 1 or 2 at a time, and pushes the result of
the operation back on the stack.  There are operators for the
usual arithmetic operations
.RB ( + ,
.BR - ,
etc),
functions
.RB ( sin ,
.BR cos ,
.BR sqrt ,
etc),
bit-shifting and manipulation
.RB ( << ,
.BR >> ,
.BR & ,
.BR | ,
etc),
logical operations
.RB ( && ,
.BR || ),
and comparators
.RB ( == ,
.BR !=,
.BR <=,
etc).  There are also unit conversions available
.RB ( i2mm ,
.BR oz2g ,
.BR f2c ,
and more).
The top two elements on the stack, in HP tradition, are
sometimes referred to in the documentation as
.I x
and
.IR y ,
but not literally within the program itself with two exceptions:  the
.B lastx
and
.B lasty
(or
.B lx
and
.BR ly )
operators return the value that was at the top and next-to-top of
stack, just previous to the most recently executed operator.

The value at the top of the stack can be shown with the
.B p
command, and the entire stack with
.BR P .
When
.B rca
prints the stack, the "top" of the stack is printed last, i.e.,
closest to the bottom of the screen.

Autoprinting will print the value at the top of the stack after most
input lines.  This is on by default; it can be toggled off with
.B 0 autoprint
(or
.B 0
.BR ap ).

.SH INFIX NOTATION
Infix expressions in
.B rca
are translated to RPN by an
implementation of Dijkstra's "shunting yard" algorithm, and then
executed as usual.
.B rca
supports infix (i.e., traditional, "normal") expressions in two
different ways: as "transient" additions to the stream
of RPN command input, and as a full-time replacement for that stream.

.RS
Transient infix expressions must be fully enclosed in parentheses, and
cannot cross to a new line.  A single line of input can be a mix of
RPN notation (unparenthesized) and complete infix expressions
(parenthesized).  The infix expressions "escape" the RPN model, but
evaluate to a single result, which is pushed onto the RPN stack as if
the infix expression were a single operator.

Full-time infix mode is turned on/off with the
.BR 0 / 1
.B infix
toggle command.  When infix mode is enabled (using
.B 1
.BR infix ),
all input is taken as infix expressions. No outer
enclosing parentheses are required.  More than one expression per line
can be separated by
.RB ' ; '.
(See below.)  A single expression must start and end on the same line of
input.  Since infix expressions are incompatible with the
.B rca
commands for printing, quitting, configuration, etc, those commands
(and any other valid RPN) must be entered following a
.B :
(colon) character.  In full-time infix mode, use
.B :q
to quit,
.B :p
to print,
.B :config
to view configuration,
.B :H\ zf\ ra
to switch to hex mode with zero-fill and right alignment, etc.  All
infix expressions put a result on the stack, so while in full-time infix
mode, the stack will slowly grow.  It can be viewed, of course, with
.BR :P .
Use
.B :0 infix
to leave full-time infix mode.
.RE

Infix expressions are evaluated with fairly typical rules of
precedence (see OPERATOR PRECEDENCE below).  All input number formats
are accepted in infix, just as in RPN.
.P
All
.B rca
stack operators can be used as infix functions, including
the unary operators (i.e.,
.BR - x
.BR + x
.BR ~ x
.BR ! x),
and all of the comparison, logical, and bitwise operators.  Infix
expressions result in a value pushed onto the stack:
.B (-3 + 5)
will push the value 2.  With single operand operators, the
operand always follows the operator.  For two operand operators,
one operand is placed to either side.  Exponentiation
would be written as
.B ( 3 ** 2
.BR ) ,
(giving 9), and bit-setting as
.B (2 setb 3)
(giving 0x0a, or 10).  The expression
.B (sin 180 == cos 90)
yields the value 1, i.e. "true".
.P
The
.B lastx
and
.B lasty
(or
.B lx
and
.BR ly )
operators can be used in an infix expression.  They return the value of
.I x
and
.I y
(i.e., the top two values on the stack) prior to the expression being
invoked.  This can be convenient for chained calculations:  if several
infix expressions are evaluated in a row, the value of
.B lx
in each will always be the the result of the previous.
In turn,
.B ly
will be the result of the second previous expression.
Also, after RPN:
.B 3 4 * (lx + ly)
will leave 12 and 7 on the stack.)
.P
Variables, named with a leading
.RB ' _ '
(underscore), like
.BR _a ,
.BR _tmp ,
or
.BR _my_var ,
can be referenced for either reading or writing.
See the SPECIAL VALUES AND VARIABLES section, below.
.P
Multiple sub-expressions separated by
.RB ' ; '
(semicolon) can be enclosed in a single pair of parentheses (or share
a single line, in full-time infix mode).  The
result of the parenthesized expression (or line) is the result of the
last such sub-expression.  The primary use of
.RB ' ; '
is likely for expressions which assign to variables.
See the example in the SPECIAL VALUES AND VARIABLES section, below.
In RPN
.RB ' ; '
discards the top stack element, like
.BR pop .
.P
If an error occurs during evaluation of an infix expression,
evaluation will cease, and the stack is left as it was at the
point of the error.
.SH OPERATING MODES
.B rca
can be configured into two main modes of operation:  floating point
(the default) using the
.B F
command, and integer, using one of
.B D
(signed decimal),
.B H
(hex),
.B O
(octal), or
.B B
(binary).  "Currency" mode,
selected with
.BR C ,
is a floating point mode tuned for working with a fixed number of
decimal places.

Math is always performed using signed arithmetic in all modes, and
most math is done using multi-precision floating point "decimal"
operands.  The system's floating point unit is not used.

In integer mode, all stack values are masked to the currently set word
width, and fractional parts are discarded.
The various integer modes differ only in how values are displayed by default.

In currency mode, all new stack values are rounded to 2 decimal places
before being pushed to the stack, and are displayed in a fixed, 2
decimal place format.  Existing stack values are not modified.  The
'2' comes from the current locale's "frac_digits" element, so may vary
in different countries.  Rounding, as elsewhere in
.BR rca ,
is "half-up", not "half-even" as is often used in financial software.

The default printing format, as determined by the current calculator
mode (i.e.,
.BR F ,
.BR D ,
.BR H ,
.BR O ,
.BR B ,
.BR C),
is used by
the
.BR p ,
.BR P ,
and
.B autoprint
commands.
Regardless of the current mode, individual values can also be
viewed in any format, from any mode, by using
.BR f ,
.BR d ,
.BR h ,
.BR o ,
.BR b ,
.BR u ,
.BR c ,
or
.BR m ,
which correspond to the similarly named modes.
When using these display commands, the value is printed as if
you had entered the corresponding (uppercase) mode, including any
masking due to word width.  (There is no
.B U
or
.B M
mode, but the
.B u
and
.B m
commands can be used to print as unsigned decimal, or as floating
point, using the maximum available number of digits.)

The only way to see the entire stack in a different base is to switch
to that mode.

The input base of a number is independent of the calculator mode, and
is controlled entirely by how it is entered:  10, 0xa, 0o12, 0b1010 and
1e01 are all the same value.  The calculator mode gives no preference to how
input is done:  for example, hex values must include the "0x" prefix
even in
.B H
mode, and "0x" may also be used when in float mode.  Note that octal
.I must
be entered using the "0o" prefix, which is also how octal is
printed.  Input using the more traditional "0" prefix is interpreted as decimal.

When entering numbers in non-decimal bases, limitations in the parser
prevents those numbers from being bigger than will fit in 64 bits, or
roughly 1.8e18.

.SS Floating point
In floating point mode (i.e.,
.B F
mode), all storage and operations use mpdecimal ("Multi-precision Decimal")
operands, resulting in far more digits of accuracy than the C floating
point math library would allow.  (mpdecimal is also used in the integer
modes, except for the bitwise operators.)
.P
Because floating point (even with decimal math) is inherently inexact,
values are sometimes calculated which are
.I almost
correct (like .99999999999... instead of 1), but not quite.
.B rca
rounds to a set number of digits when displaying and comparing.
See also the DATA TYPES, OVERFLOW, ACCURACY section, below.
.P
Floating point printing can be controlled by the
.BR automatic ,
.BR engineering ,
.BR fixed ,
and
.B digits
commands.
.P
With
.B automatic
(or
.BR auto ),
output is flexible:  scientific notation (e.g., 1e09) is used
when the exponent would be less than -4, or greater than the chosen
number of digits (see below).  Otherwise the output is a simple
decimal number.
.P
.B engineering
(or
.BR eng )
is suited to engineering and science:  scientific notation is
always used, but only with exponents which are a multiple of 3.  This
allows direct reading of values that might be in units with prefixes
like kilo, mega, nano, pico, etc.
.P
With
.BR fixed ,
.B rca
never uses scientific notation, always presenting numbers as just a
whole and fractional part.  This works well for values with small
numbers of digits near decimal point, and is convenient for using
the output in scripts, but gets awkward with extremely large
or extremely small numbers.
.P
The
.B digits
command controls the number of digits displayed by any of the above
formats.  (Only display is affected:  the actual number of digits/bits
stored and used in computation is unaffected.)
For
.B auto
and
.B eng
formats, the number configured with
.B digits
is simply the number of digits either format will display.  For
.B fixed
format, it's the number of digits shown after the decimal point.
.P
.B digits
will allow setting a value as low as 0, since this can be useful with
.B fixed
format (to print no fractional part whatever).  The
.B auto
and
.B eng
formats have their own minimums (1, and 3, respectively) which they
enforce silently.  Requesting
.B -1 digits
will choose the calculator maximum.
.P
The maximum allowed
.B digits
value is configured when rca is built, but can be modified by setting
an environment variable at startup.   (See CONFIGURATION, below.)
.SS Integer
Integer mode is selected with any of the following commands, which
also choose the default printing format:
.B D
(signed decimal),
.B H
(hex),
.B O
(octal), or
.B B
(binary).

By default the width of
.BR rca 's
integers is the maximum supported, but it can be configured to as
few as 2 bits using the
.B width
or
.BR bits
commands.  Requesting a width of -1 will choose the maximum width,
which is 64 bits on all supported platforms.
Be aware that the argument for the width command is itself subject
to restrictions placed on integers.  If
.B 2 bits
is configured, undoing it requires either using
.B -1 bits
to set to the maximum, or leaving integer mode with
.BR F
before adjusting the width.  (The word width can also be raised
incrementally.)

Values are masked to the current word width for both
use and display, whether they are input by the user or result from an
operation.  Arithmetic on all values is signed.  If floating
operations are used on width-restricted integers, the width
restriction is ignored for the operation, but masking will happen
when storing the result.

.SS Numeric separators
.B rca
can add commas (or the locale's "thousands separator") to group the
numbers it prints.  These separators can be toggled on or off with
.BR 0 / 1
.B sep
(or
.BR separators ).
Separators are applied to all integer bases and floating formats,
as in "3,141,593" and "0o13,767,730".  The separators are strictly
cosmetic, and based solely on the printed digits.  No bitwise
splitting (e.g., into bytes) is implied.

On input, the locale's currency symbol and thousands separator are
ignored, as a convenience for doing arithmetic on copy/pasted data.

See the LOCALE section, below, for more detail.

.SH SPECIAL VALUES AND VARIABLES
The
.B pi
and
.B e
operators push the obvious constants onto the stack.

In the HP tradition, the
.B sto
("store")
operator copies
.I x
to an off-stack storage location (without
disturbing the stack).
.B rcl
("recall")
fetches that value, pushing it onto the stack.  These commands are
largely superseded by
.B rca
variables, but are still quick and convenient.

Variables are created dynamically (with a value of 0) on first
reference, either by assigning a value (
.B _var =
.BR 42 ),
or by using it (
.B _var +
.BR 17 ).
Variables' names must start with an underscore character.  In RPN,
simply naming the variable will push its value to the stack.  To assign
to a variable in RPN, the "assign to" operator
.RB ( = )
must be used immediately before naming the variable.  If
.B =
is not followed by a variable name, it's a no-op.  (This is the only
"stateful" RPN operation.)
.P
The following two sequences are equivalent.
Both set 4 variables:  _w, _l, _area, and _diagonal.  It works best to
say "assign to" for
.B =
when reading the RPN version.
.br
.ti +4n
.B 3=_w 4=_l * = _area  _l 2 ^ _w 2 ^ + sqrt = _diagonal
.br
and
.br
.ti +4n
.B (_w=3; _l=4; _area=_l * _w; _diagonal = sqrt (_w^2 + _l^2))
.P
Variables can be listed with
.B variables
or
.BR vars .
Variables can all be discarded with
.BR clearvariables .
Variables cannot be deleted individually.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The
.B config
command shows a summary of the current settings in
.BR rca ,
along with the commands needed to recreate those settings.
.B rca
doesn't read a configuration file on startup.  Instead,
commands are read from the environment variable
.BR RCA_INIT ,
and then from any command line arguments.  Initial conditions can be
established by either method.  Any output from commands run via
.B $RCA_INIT
is discarded.  Also on startup,
.B rca
will use the
.B $RCA_DIGITS
variable to set the maximum number of displayed digits.  That value
cannot be set below 2, but there is no enforced maximum.  (Caveat
emptor.)  The current built-in default is 30 digits.

Many of the commands that control
.BR rca 's
operation and appearance have been described elsewhere, but a concise
list may be useful:

.RS
.P

.BR F ,
.BR D ,
.BR H ,
.BR O ,
and
.B B
choose float or integer, and the default output base. (Startup:
.BR F )
.P
.B automatic
(or
.BR auto )
chooses a floating point format that switches between
scientific notation and simple decimal based on the
magnitude of the number being shown.  (Startup:
.B auto
is selected.)
.P
.B engineering
(or
.BR eng )
chooses a floating point format which uses scientific notation, but
only with exponents which are a multiple of 3.
.P
.B fixed
chooses a floating point format that will never use
scientific notation.
.P
.B digits
chooses the number of digits used by the floating point formats.  The
maximum is the number of significant digits supported by the calculator.
Selecting a count of -1 will select the calculator's maxiumum.
(Startup:  6)
.P
.B width
(or
.BR bits )
chooses the size of integers, in bits.
Selecting a size of -1 will select the maxiumum.
(Startup: calculator maximum, likely 64).
.P
.B separators
(or
.BR sep )
toggles whether output will include separators (usually ',', but
see the LOCALE section) for readability.  (Startup: enabled)
.P
.B rightalign
(or
.BR ra )
toggles whether displayed values should be vertically aligned at the
left margin by their first digit, or to the right, by their decimal
point.  (Startup:  enabled)
.P
.B zerofill
(or
.BR zf )
toggles whether or not hex, octal, and binary integers are
left-padded out to the chosen word width with zeros.  (Startup: disabled)
.P
.B autoprint
(or
.BR ap )
toggles printing of the top of stack after newlines.  (Startup:
enabled)
.P
.B degrees
toggles whether degrees are used by the trig functions, rather than
radians.  (Startup:  enabled)
.P
.B infix
toggles whether full-time infix mode is active or not.  Use
.B 1 infix
to enable, and
.B :0 infix
to disable.
(Startup:  disabled)
.P
.B echo
toggles whether input that comes from a file or pipe should be copied
to stdout, allowing commands to be recorded along with
their results.  (Output from
.B rca
all starts with at least one space character, so input and output can
usually be easily distinguished.) Unlike other
.B rca
commands,
.B echo
produces no confirmation messages.
(Startup:  disabled)
.P
.B errorexit
forces
.B rca
to exit on any subsequent error.  Normally errors which result from
user input are reported, but operation continues.  (Startup: disabled)
.RE

All of the above commands will print a confirmation message, but to
avoid confusion, that message will only print if the command is the
last on its line of input.

.SH HELP
The
.B help
or
.B ?
command gives a complete list of operators/commands.
If $PAGER is set in the environment, the shell command it names is
used to display the help text.  (The command must read the text
from standard input.)  Otherwise the text is sent directly to stdout.

The
.B state
command will print a summary of
.BR rca 's
current state.

.SH OPERATOR PRECEDENCE
Infix evaluation depends on operator precedence and associativity.
The
.B precedence
command lists the operators by decreasing precedence.  The 'R'
denotes those which are right associative.  All others group
left to right.  (This list has no meaning for RPN.)

 \fR 1    \fB  ( ; )
 \fR 2  R \fB  + - ~ ! bitc chs negate recip sqrt sin cos tan asin acos
 \fR      \fB      atan exp ln log2 log10 abs frac int i2mm mm2i ft2m
 \fR      \fB      m2ft mi2km km2mi f2c c2f oz2g g2oz oz2ml ml2oz q2l
 \fR      \fB      l2q d2r r2d dd2dms dms2dd mpg2l100km
 \fR 3  R \fB  ^ **
 \fR 4    \fB  atan2
 \fR 5    \fB  * x / mod
 \fR 6    \fB  % +% -% %?
 \fR 7    \fB  + -
 \fR 8    \fB  >> << ror rol
 \fR 9    \fB  & clearb
 \fR 10   \fB  xor
 \fR 11   \fB  | setb
 \fR 12   \fB  < > <= >=
 \fR 13   \fB  == !=
 \fR 14   \fB  &&
 \fR 15   \fB  ||
 \fR 16   \fB  =
 \fR


Like C, Java, JavaScript, and Rust (but unlike Python and bc),
the
.\" troff thinks the '!' is end of sentence, and adds an extra space.
.\" suppress with a "no extra spaces" command.
.B !\&
operator (logical NOT) is a high-precedence unary operator and binds very
strongly.  So
.B (!_a == _b)
is the same as
.B ((!_a) ==
.BR _b) .

Unlike C, Java, and JavaScript (but like Ruby, Python, Rust, and
bc), the bitwise operators bind more tightly than comparison operators.
So
.B (_a & _b == 5)
is the same as
.B ((_a & _b) ==
.BR 5) .
\" Even Dennis Ritchie thought C got that one wrong.

.SH VARIADIC OPERATORS
Variadic operators use all or some of the stack, optionally stopping
just before reaching a previously set "mark".  They are the only
operators which use more than two stack elements.  Variadic operators
cannot be used in an infix expression.
.P
.I N
.B mark
(i.e., the
.B mark
command with an argument of
.IR N )
will cause a later variadic operation to consider just the current top
.I N
values, plus any further values that are pushed prior to the operation.
.I N
cannot be greater than the depth of the stack.
.B 0 mark
sets the mark at the current top of stack,
causing only subsequent pushes to be included by a later variadic.
.B -1 mark
will clear the mark.  If set, the position of the mark is shown
when the full stack is printed.
.P
.B snapshot
is variadic, and will make a copy of the stack up to the mark or
the end of stack.  The copied entries are undisturbed.  Its complement,
.BR restore ,
will set the stack mark at the top of stack, and then push the entire
saved snapshot.  (The mark is set as a convenience for later
use of the restored entries.)
A full exact copy of the stack is ensured by
.B -1 mark snapshot
followed later by
.B clear
.BR restore .
The
.B clearsnapshot
command will discard any existing snapshot.
.P
.BR sum ,
.BR avg ,
and
.B stddev
are variadics which calculate the total, the mean, and the sample
standard deviation of stack entries up to the mark or the end of
stack.  The entries are removed, and are replaced by the result.  As a
convenience, these commands will attempt a snapshot before proceeding,
but won't overwrite an existing snapshot.  Always doing a manual
snapshot is safest, but it can be skipped if only working with one set
of data.
.RS
.B 1 3 7 10 snapshot avg restore stddev
.RE
will leave the average and standard deviation of the given list on the
stack.

.SH OPERATOR NOTES
Most operators behave as they are commonly understood to.  A few need
more specific documentation.
.RS
.P
In
.BR rca 's
infix expressions, exponentiation
.RB ( ^
or
.BR ** )
is right associative, and has lower
precedence than unary minus.  Each of these lines returns a result
of 1 (true):
.RS
.P
.B ((2 ^ 3 ^ 2) == (2 ^ (3 ^ 2)))
.I # i.e., 512
.P
.B ((-3 ^ 2) == ((-3) ^ 2)))
.I # i.e., 9
.RE

.P
.B mod
(modulo) is a floating point operation, not integer.
.P
.B frac
applied to negative values will give a negative result.
.P
There are several two-operand percentage operators:
.B %
gives x % of y (or vice versa, of course, since it's commutative).
.B +%
and
.B -%
give y plus or minus x percent of y.  So
.B 50 17 +%
results in 58.5.
.B %?
gives the inverse of those, i.e., the delta percentage:
.B 50 58.5 %?
results in 17.
.P
In an infix expression, operators with two arguments expect
them to the left and right.  This is intuitive for
symbolic operators (as in
.B 1 + 2
), but for named
operators it can look odd.
.B (0xf0\ setb\ 3)
sets bit 3 in 0xf0.
.B atan2
works similarly.  This expression:
.B (sin 30 atan2 cos 30)
could also be written as
.B ((sin 30) atan2 (cos 30))
and will evaluate to "30".  (In RPN, this would be
.B 30 sin 30 cos
.BR atan2 .)
.P
The trigonometric functions
.RB ( sin ,
.BR cos ,
.BR tan ,
.BR asin ,
.BR acos ,
.BR atan ,
and
.BR atan2 )
take and return angles in degrees by default.
.B 0 degrees
will switch them to radians, and
.B 1 degrees
will switch them back.  Also, the
.BR d2r / r2d
operators convert the angle units directly.
.P
Bitwise operations
.RB ( ~
.BR << ,
.BR >> ,
.BR & ,
.BR | ,
.BR xor ,
.BR clearb ,
.B and
.BR setb )
convert their operands to integer first, regardless of mode.  As might
be expected, these operations will discard fractional parts, and
may discard digits.  Bitwise operations will not execute, and will
cause an error, if either operand will not fit in a
.I long
.IR long .
.P
.P
.B dd2dms
and
.B dms2dd
convert between decimal degrees and degrees/minutes/seconds.
The d/m/s format (ab)uses the floating point format:
a) whole degrees are left alone, b) minutes use the two digits
immediately following the decimal, c) seconds (and fractions) come next,
starting at the "thousandths" digit.  So 40\(de41\(fm21.3\(sdN,
74°2\(fm40\(sdW would be expressed as 40.41213 and -74.0240 in DMS,
and the dms2dd operator would convert them to 40.6892 and -74.0444 in
decimal degrees.  Of course, this conversion can also be used for time
values expressed in hours, minutes, and seconds.
Use
.B dd2dms
with "fixed" display mode, and with at least 4 fractional digits, to ensure
seeing the DMS format correctly.
.P
.B nop
does nothing.  If used as the last command on a line,
.B nop
has the side effect of suppressing normal printed output, which can be
useful in scripts.
.P
The
.B :
(colon) command does nothing, but signifies to the parser that the
rest of the line should be interpreted as RPN.  This is needed when in
full-time infix mode, to accomplish printing and mode changing,
or to quit.

.RE
.SH LOCALE
The locale is consulted for just a few things:  the decimal point,
the thousands separator and grouping specification, the currency
symbol, and the number of fractional digits used for currency.  If
using the minimal C/POSIX locale, defaults are provided:  the
thousands separator is set to ',' (at every 3 digits), fractional
digits are set to 2, and the currency symbol to '$'.
.P
The locale always chooses the decimal point.  Usually this is '.', but
is also commonly ','.
.P
The thousands separator is stripped from all input, and
on output will optionally be used for numeric grouping.
.P
The currency symbol is checked to see if its value occurs
anywhere in the name of any
.B rca
command or operator.  If not, it is stripped from all input.

.SH DATA TYPES, OVERFLOW, ACCURACY
All stack values in
.B rca
are stored in mpdecimal
format.  This is convenient for a calculator
which will primarily deal with floating point, but can affect
.BR rca 's
mixed model.  Changing
.BR rca 's
operating mode from floating point to an integer mode
requires conversion of all stack values
to integer.
If the conversion from mpdecimal to
.I long long
can't be done without loss, a message is issued, but the
conversion has already occurred.  (The message shows the value with
enough digits that it can be restored accurately via copy and paste.)
If the conversion occurred while simply displaying a float as
integer, without changing modes, then the original value is unchanged.
Execution will proceed after the warning unless
.B errorexit
has been enabled.

Some floating point operations give results which are invalid: "nan"
(i.e., "not a number"), or "+inf" or "-inf" (i.e., infinity).  When
converting to integer mode, these values are preserved, along with
their semantics:  any computation involving nan will return nan, and
any conditionals involving nan will return false.
.B rca
doesn't distinguish between mathematical poles (e.g., the value of
"tan(pi/2)") and overflow conditions (very large finite values that
could be represented, if only you'd bought a better calculator).  Both
show as "+/-inf".

Floating point math by its nature is imprecise.  It's not uncommon for
small rounding errors, and errors introduced by the necessary truncations
to change values in obvious ways.  Something
that should be 0 may instead have a very tiny value, or two numbers which
should be equal may differ by an insignificant amount.
.B rca
helps by rounding displayed values to
.BR rca 's
maximum precision.  The internal representation
(using a few digits more) of these values remains unchanged --
.I only
the printed output (or the comparison) is affected.

Rounding in rca is always "half-up".  That is, when rounding a value
exactly halfway between the two rounding choices, rounding goes away
from zero.

.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rca
will normally exit with status 0 or 1.  To satisfy normal shell
boolean logic semantics, the exit status is 0 if the top of stack
is non-zero, and 1 if the top of stack is 0.
A normal exit with an empty stack causes an exit status of 2.
Unrecoverable internal errors (e.g., failed memory allocation) cause
an exit status of 3.
Errors resulting from user input (parsing errors, empty stack, data
conversion warnings) are non-fatal unless the
.B errorexit
toggle has been set.  In that case, those warnings and errors will
cause an exit status of 4.  This can be useful when
.B rca
is used non-interactively.

.SH SHELL SUPPORT
Incorporating
.B rca
into the shell is straightforward:

\" create CODE/ENDCODE macros to preserve text verbatim
.de CODE
.br
.nr saveIN \\n(.i   \" double the backslash when defining a macro
.RS
.nf
.nh
..
.de ENDCODE
.hy
.fi
.RE
.in \\n[saveIN]u    \" 'u' means 'units': do not scale this number
..

.CODE

# This shell snippet gives simple access to rca's floating point
# capability from a POSIX shell.  Use it with "source rca_float".
#
# After including this code, use lines like this to calculate:
#       foo=$(fe "$bar * pi")
# or like this for a conditional expression:
#       if fc "(10 * 3) < $foo"; then ...
#
# Use RCA_INIT to set common initial conditions.  Defaults are
# provided here, but values set externally will override.

export RCA_INIT_DEFAULTS="3digits fixed 0separators 1errorexit"

_rca_run()    # support routine
{
    local output exitcode

    output=$(
        RCA_INIT="$RCA_INIT_DEFAULTS ${RCA_INIT:-}" \\
            rca "$*" q 2>&1
        )
    exitcode=$?

    # strip leading/trailing whitespace
    read -rd '' output <<< "$output"

    case $exitcode in
    0|1)
        echo "$output"
        return $exitcode ;;
    esac

    echo "rca failure: '$output'" >&2
    exit $exitcode
}

fe()    # Evaluate a floating point expression.
{
    _rca_run "( $* )"
    return 0
}

fc()     # Evaluate a floating point conditional expression.
{
    _rca_run "( $* )" >/dev/null
}

.ENDCODE


.SH AUTHOR
Paul Fox created
.B rca
(formerly called "ca") very slowly over a span of decades, starting in 1993.

